Improve the handling of image coordinates (#1414)
sherpa/sherpa: docs/developer/index.rst

:py:class:`sherpa.astro.data.DataIMG` class extends the 2D support to
include the concept of a coordinate system, allowing the independent
axis to be one of:

- ``logical``
- ``image``
- ``world``

where the aim is that the logical system refers to a pixel number (no
coordinate system), image is a linear transform of the logical system,
and world identifies a projection from the image system onto the
celestial sphere. However, there is no requirement that this
categorization holds as it depends on whether the optional
:py:attr:`~sherpa.astro.data.DataIMG.sky` and
:py:attr:`~sherpa.astro.data.DataIMG.eqpos` attributes are set when
the :py:class:`~sherpa.astro.data.DataIMG` object is created.

Using a coordinate system directly
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If the independent axes are known, and not calculated via a coordinate
transform, then they can just be set when creating the
:py:class:`~sherpa.astro.data.DataIMG` object, leaving the
:py:attr:`~sherpa.astro.data.DataIMG.coord` attribute set to
``logical``.

  >>> x0 = np.asarray([1000, 1200, 2000])
  >>> x1 = np.asarray([-500, 500, -500])
  >>> y = np.asarray([10, 200, 30])

>   >>> d = DataIMG("example", x0, x1, y)

Reviewer: Usually, images are squares. Here, it's some kind of odd triangle. It's kind of cute that that works, but (a) I'm not sure that's a good idea in general and (b) I'm almost sure it's not a good idea to use that as the canonical example. Instead, I would move this example to the end of the discussion after the reader has seen the "normal" case or alternatively, add a sentence like "This is not the normal case for an image, hang on and see below"

Author: There is an interesting discussion to be had on what we mean for the `Data2D` and `DataIMG` cases - perhaps the `DataIMG` case should require a rectangular grid, but that's a different discussion than this PR.

I'll have to look at improving the docs tomorrow.

Reviewer: Agreed. This is absolutely not what I had expected and I wonder if that's an accident of the design or if there is a real use case. Either way, this PR is certainly not the place to change that!

Author: I looked at replacing this with a grid, but I think it is important to let you know you don't need a grid. So I've added a note to the start of this little section pointing this out.

     -----        ----          -----          ---          ---      -----
     gauss2d.fwhm thawed         1000  1.17549e-38  3.40282e+38
     gauss2d.xpos thawed         1500 -3.40282e+38  3.40282e+38
     gauss2d.ypos thawed         -100 -3.40282e+38  3.40282e+38
     gauss2d.ellip frozen            0            0        0.999
     gauss2d.theta frozen            0     -6.28319      6.28319    radians
     gauss2d.ampl thawed          100 -3.40282e+38  3.40282e+38
  >>> d.eval_model(mdl)
  array([32.08564744, 28.71745887, 32.08564744])

Attempting to change the coordinate system with
:py:class:`~sherpa.astro.data.DataIMF.set_coord` will error out with a
:py:class:`sherpa.utils.err.DataErr` instance reporting that the data
set does not specify a shape.

The shape attribute
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The ``shape`` argument can be set when creating a
:py:class:`~sherpa.astro.data.DataIMG` object to indicate that the
data represents an "image", that is a rectangular, contiguous, set of
pixels. It is defined as ``(nx1, nx0)``, and so matches the ndarray
``shape`` attribute from NumPy. Operations that treat the dataset as a
2D grid often require that the ``shape`` attribute is set.

>   >>> x1, x0 = np.mgridp1L4, 1:5]

Reviewer: typo. (that's mey motivation for #813 but we'll see when I get to that).

  >>> y2 = (x0 - 2.5)**2 + (x1 - 2)**2
  >>> y = np.sqrt(y2)
  >>> d = DataIMG('img', x0.flatten(), x1.flatten(),
  ...             y.flatten(), shape=y.shape)
  >>> print(d)
  name      = img
  x0        = Int64[12]
  x1        = Int64[12]
  y         = Float64[12]
  shape     = (3, 4)
  staterror = None
  syserror  = None
  sky       = None
  eqpos     = None
  coord     = logical
  >>> d.get_x0()
  array([1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4, 1, 2, 3, 4])
  >>> d.get_x1()
  array([1, 1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2, 2, 3, 3, 3, 3])
  >>> d.get_dep()
  array([1.80277564, 1.11803399, 1.11803399, 1.80277564, 1.5       ,
         0.5       , 0.5       , 1.5       , 1.80277564, 1.11803399,
         1.11803399, 1.80277564])
  >>> d.get_axes()
  (array([1., 2., 3., 4.]), array([1., 2., 3.]))
  >>> d.get_dims()
  (4, 3)

Attempting to change the coordinate system with
:py:class:`~sherpa.astro.data.DataIMF.set_coord` will error out with a
:py:class:`sherpa.utils.err.DataErr` instance reporting that the data
set does not contain the required coordinate system.

Setting a coordinate system
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> The :py:class:`sherpa.astro.io.wcs.WCS` class is used to add a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `sherpa.astro.io.wcs.WCS` class is used to add a
```
should work, too. (Same in other places, but I'm only commenting once). One advantage is that it's a little easier to read the plaintext rst because there is less markup in it. I admit, it matter more in docstrings in the code, because those are read in plain text much more often than rst files...

coordinate system to an image. It has support for linear (translation

> and scale) and "wcs" - currently tangent-plane projections -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and scale) and "wcs" - currently only tangent-plane projection -
```

  >>> d.get_axes()
  (array([1000., 1002., 1004.]), array([2000., 2002.]))
  >>> d.indep
  (array([1000., 1002., 1004., 1000., 1002., 1004.]), array([2000., 2000., 2000., 2002., 2002., 2002.]))

It is possible to switch back to the original coordinate system (the
arguments sent in as ``x0`` and ``x1`` when creating the object):

  >>> d.set_coord("logical")
  >>> d.indep
  (array([1, 2, 3, 1, 2, 3]), array([1, 1, 1, 2, 2, 2]))

In Sherpa 4.14.0 and earlier, this conversion was handled by taking
the current axes pair and applying the necessary WCS objects to create
the selected coordinate system (that is, the argument to the
`set_coord` call). This had the advantage of saving memory, as you
only needed to retain the current pair of independent axes, but at the
expense of losing fidelity when converting between the coordinate
systems. This has been changed so that the original independent axes
are now stored in the object, in the ``_orig_indep_axis`` attribute,
and this is now used whenever the coordinate system is changed. This
does increase the memory size of a `DataIMG` object, and makes it
harder to load in picked files created with an old Sherpa version (the

> code will do it's best to create the necessary information but it is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
code will do its best to create the necessary information but it's
```

Author: I see what you did there.
